Title: failure, grit, and big thinking
Date: 2012-08-31 18:43
Category: articles, life
Slug: failure-grit-and-big-thinking

Last fall, I read an article in the New York Times called "[What if the
Secret to Success is Failure?][]"  It's a pretty long read, but I really
enjoyed it.  The article centers around Dominic Randall, headmaster of a
New York City private K-12 school, and a few other prominent figures who
thought hard about what qualities are most important for students'
success in school and how to teach and develop those qualities in their
students.

They were figuring out how to predict student success in high school and
college, but I have no trouble believing that that the conclusions and
findings presented in the article probably extrapolate immediately to
graduate school success.  The question was "what kinds of people succeed
in academic situations that are extremely challenging, often to the
point of discouraging?"

What they came up with as the answer was...inspiring.  Their list of the
qualities necessary to really succeed was as follows: **zest, grit,
self-control, social intelligence, gratitude, optimism and curiosity.
 **I call this list "inspiring" mostly because of what
it *doesn't* contain:  competitiveness, supergenius IQ, hardness...the
qualities of the uber-smart but really intimidating people I've met and
don't ever feel like I can measure up to.  But no -- the big-thinking
educators and psychologists mentioned in the article found other
qualities more important.  Qualities I've found and really value in
people I deeply respect.  Qualities that show "character is at least as
important as intellect." Zest, grit, self-control, social intelligence,
gratitude, optimism, curiosity.  The kinds of people that have those
qualities are the kinds that succeed.

The most discussed quality on that list (and I believe the one that gave
the article its title) was **grit**, described as:

> "a passion for a single mission [combined] with an unswerving
> dedication to achieve that mission, whatever the obstacles and however
> long it might take."

So grit is mostly developed through failure. It's hypothesized that kids
who have never failed, who haven't really faced obstacles, who have
*always* been told "great job!", never develop one of the key elements
to success: grit.

But...that means that the most successful academics - the ones with
zest, grit, self-control, social intelligence, gratitude, optimism,
curiosity, the ones I look up to - developed grit at some point.  They
failed at some point.  They FAILED!  This was such an eye-opening
realization to me.  Even the best fail.  A lot.  Most successful people
I've met don't really advertise their failures, but I think (at some
point) they should.  For example: My advisor wrote a whole public [blog
post on his failures][], which I thought was awesome.  When smart,
successful people share their setbacks, it teaches students that if you
fail at something, it (a) doesn't mean you're not smart enough, (b)
doesn't mean you'll never be successful, and (c) doesn't mean you should
give up or play it safe.  It just means you have to stay motivated, stay
confident, and figure something else out.

Then the question becomes this:  how do people develop those traits?
 Are they personality traits?  Should they somehow be taught?  (One of
the main topics of the NYT article was how the school should go about
developing kids' character).  When you're in your 20s, how do you work
on developing your character?  I don't really have answers.  I have some
ideas - ideas that I don't implement perfectly, but that I think would
help develop zest, grit, self-control, social intelligence, gratitude,
optimism, and/or curiosity:

​(1)  Hang around people who already exhibit those traits.  Get to know
them.  If they're your peers, be friends with them.  People with zest
and gratitude and optimism and social intelligence are often really fun
people to hang out with anyway.

(2).  Read.  Word on the street is that [successful people read a
ton][].  Check out [Goodreads][] to turn reading into social networking
(a great way to get recommendations!).

(3).  Work hard, play hard.  Like your work enough to spend a good
amount of time on it - enough time to try out crazy ideas (that might
fail spectacularly) and to do quality work.  And be social - build
relationships, make friends, enjoy your city.

(4).  Be a big thinker.  All my favorite people in our department are
what I consider big thinkers: people who have big ideas - ideas that
sometimes seem crazy (and sometimes are), people who LOVE what they do,
people who aren't afraid to get enthused about statistics or
bioinformatics or computer science, people who proudly and loudly geek
out, people who set really lofty goals (and often don't meet them, but
accomplish significant things while trying!), people who speak up when
they have an idea or a question, people who encourage others, people who
listen to those who are smarter than them.  Be one of those people.

We'll see how this goes for the rest of grad school (and beyond)!

  [What if the Secret to Success is Failure?]: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/18/magazine/what-if-the-secret-to-success-is-failure.html?pagewanted=all
  [blog post on his failures]: http://simplystatistics.org/post/29067196398/a-non-exhaustive-list-of-things-i-have-failed-to
  [successful people read a ton]: http://lifehacker.com/5936493/want-to-be-a-great-leader-start-reading
  [Goodreads]: http://www.goodreads.com/
