Title: Merry Statistician's Christmas!
Date: 2012-11-08 04:17
Slug: merry-statisticians-christmas

My advisor told me today, in a fit of excitement and enthusiasm, that
"the real winners in this election were statisticians."  (He later went
on to joyfully declare, "Man, I LOVE being a statistician!"  The guy is
living the dream.)  According to him, today is statistician's Christmas.
 What a great metaphor!  Check it out: all year long, we predict and
model and analyze and see if we can figure out what will happen.
 Everything goes down on Tuesday night, and we wake up Wednesday morning
to the best gift of all: the real data.  And this lets us figure out how
well our models and predictions and analyses did.

This year, the stat nerds did awesome.  Nate Silver (of
[fivethirtyeight][]) is Mr. Popular in geek circles right now.  Should
Florida officially go Obama, he will have predicted every state's vote
correctly.  That's really hard to do, since so many factors influence
how people vote and not all of them are measurable, but man, he and some
other awesome people [rocked it][].  Check out this [amazing Twitter
hashtag][] it spawned. 

It's also kinda cool to look at the data visualization stuff that comes
after elections.  I "watched" a lot of the election coverage on
[Huffpost][] - their [state-by-state graphics][] were really nice.  I
liked the interactive parts - e.g., how hovering over a dot on the
county scatterplot told you which county it was.  On another note, the
main way we visualize US election data is with the results map, where
states are colored red if they went Republican and blue if they went
Democrat.  This caused my roommate (who isn't from the US) to comment
"That map is looking pretty red...Romney must be winning?"  And that's
the problem with the election map - big, unpopulated, 3-vote states are
usually red.  [NPR did some fun stuff][] that addressed this issue by
making the sizes and colors of states on the map a bit more informative.

So, merry stat-mas to all!  Enjoy the peace and quite of the [election
being over][].

  [fivethirtyeight]: http://fivethirtyeight.blogs.nytimes.com/
  [rocked it]: http://simplystatistics.org/post/35187901781/nate-silver-does-it-again-will-pundits-finally-accept
  [amazing Twitter hashtag]: https://twitter.com/search?q=%23natesilverfacts&src=typd
  [Huffpost]: http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/2012/results
  [state-by-state graphics]: http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/2012/results/minnesota
  [NPR did some fun stuff]: http://www.npr.org/blogs/itsallpolitics/2012/11/01/163632378/a-campaign-map-morphed-by-money
  [election being over]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjrthOPLAKM&feature=related
