---
layout: post
title:  "Ideas for super awesome conferences"
date:   2013-03-18
---

At this time last week, I was experiencing my first [ENAR][]!  Overall I
had a great time  - met some cool people, went to some cool sessions,
hung out by the pool and went to Epcot, etc.  But as we were hanging out
over the course of the conference, I found myself in more than one
discussion with friends about how stat conferences could be so much more
awesome.  I thought to myself  last Monday: "Alyssa!  You haven't
written in your blog since Election Day.  'Ideas for Super Awesome
Conferences' would be a fabulous post!"  And then I was beaten to the
punch by [Yihui's post on conferences][].  Read it, it's good.  But I
have some different (and sometimes conflicting) ideas, so I decided to
write "Ideas for Super Awesome Conferences" anyway.

DISCLAIMER:  I'm no expert.  I've only been to two big stat conferences
(ENAR 2013 and [JSM 2012][] in San Diego).  I'm a TOTAL CONFERENCE
NEWBIE (since I'm a third-year student).  Also, I have also never
planned a conference so I most likely have no idea what goes in to such
a huge endeavor.  Bearing this in mind...

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Ideas for Conference
Organizers</span>:

<span style="line-height:13px;">**(1)** Choose a good venue.  This is
probably the first thing that happens after the city is chosen, so I'm
sure a lot of thought goes in to this, but the venue at ENAR left a lot
to be desired.  For one thing, the conference was held in a giant
conference-center/hotel megacomplex with pretty much *nothing *outside
the complex.  This meant:</span>

-   <span style="line-height:13px;">there weren't really any options for
    food except for the megacomplex restaurants, which all served the
    same food and charged \$14 for chicken fingers (which is either a
    totally ridiculous thing to submit for reimbursement, if you're
    lucky enough to have that, or a totally outlandish way to spend your
    graduate student stipend)</span>
-   There was one convenient hotel choice, so if you missed the February
    15 deadline for booking a room, wanted a cheaper option, or wanted
    to rack up your hotel rewards points for some other chain, or
    anything like that, you had to stay in a hotel at least a few
    non-walkable miles from the conference center.  The solution to this
    was I guess to just stay in the conference hotel (which is where I
    was, and it was convenient and nice), but then I realized on Tuesday
    that I hadn't been outside in three days that that made me sad.
-   Evening activities were limited to whatever was in the megacomplex,
    unless you wanted to spring for a several-mile cab ride.  (We did
    get bused to Epcot, which totally rocked except for the fact that we
    only got to stay for a couple of hours, most of which were spent
    eating dinner.)

I also found it somewhat hilarious that the conference material plugged
the venue by saying that this conference center has the "largest
pillar-free resort ballroom" in the country (which is oddly specific,
but whatever) - and then saying that ENAR wouldn't actually
be *using *this ballroom but that we were free to go take a look at it!
 Okay...

Anyway, my ideal venue would be located within walking distance of
several hotels, restaurants, bars, convenience or grocery stores, etc -
the key to me is *having options*.  I think this is where Yihui and I
diverge a little bit, because I don't think a college campus like Iowa
State would be a good place to have a conference at all.  For one thing,
most college dorms are occupied with college kids during the school
year, so the whole dorm option seems unlikely, and if you're in a
small-ish town with limited hotel space (like Ames, or like the small
town I went to college in), it just won't be possible to fit all the
participants in. For another, I don't think forced interaction between
participants because there's literally nothing else to do is very
healthy - I've found that having somewhere to go (an interesting
restaurant or bar) is a fun way to socialize/network with people you've
just met.  It takes away some of the tension.  Also, Ames is 41 miles
from the nearest major airport - I know that's specific to Iowa State,
but it's true for a lot of more rural universities, and I think it would
be a major inconvenience.  For an example of a venue I really liked,
take last summer's JSM in San Diego - nice conference center, many hotel
choices, good food around, the beach was accessible by public transit...

Also, the venue should have good wifi.  Accessible within the entire
conference center, including the session rooms (in case presenters need
to upload their slides from Dropbox because their favorite flashdrives
mysteriously went missing the day before they needed to leave and their
backup flashdrives suddenly decide to be "malformed" or whatever.  Not
that this happened to anyone I know...).  The cost of such wifi could
probably be included in the registration fee.

**(2)  **Have a conference app!  It's 2013.  We work in a tech-y field.
 Lots of people have smartphones and would use the app.  It would
include most of what is in the printed program (which would solve the
excessive program-printing problem) in addition to a scheduler - so you
could plan out the talks/sessions you want to go to that day (thanks to
my friend [John][] for this idea, which I LOVE).  It could also include
things like a live twitter feed, an "announcement area" for room changes
and lost-and-found issues and whatnot, and some of the social networking
features that Yihui was talking about (e.g., search for participants by
name or by university, so you could see whether anyone you know from
years ago will be coming).  This app could probably get made cheaply and
quickly if it were a contest (in a word: crowdsource!)

**(3) **Like Yihui said, have the nametags be printed front and back.
 Such a good, simple idea.  Also, potentially ask for first and last
names in separate boxes on the registration form...my friend got a
printed badge that said her last name in giant letters instead of her
first name, which was kind of hilarious and also kind of unfortunate.

**(4)  **Think carefully about placement of the poster session, because
it's often hard to get people to go to that part of the conference.  I
had a couple discussions about this.  I tend to agree with [Karl][], who
suggested having it as the only thing happening during an afternoon
session in the middle of the conference.  This way: everybody's around.
 They've all arrived and they aren't leaving yet.  (The one at this
conference was Sunday night - the first day - so a lot of people weren't
there yet).  Nobody has another session they really wanted to be at that
conflicts with it.  I talked a little more about it with [Tom][], a
conference vet who says that people still don't really go if it's
scheduled like that.  All I'll say is this:  even if it's in the
afternoon, have food and drinks.  Kind of a happy hour situation.  Maybe
not open bar, but cash bar would be awesome (though a beer should cost
less than \$11...).  And advertise the happy hour nature of the session.

 

Now, the responsibility making a conference awesome does not fall only
on the shoulders of the organizers....

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Ideas for Conference
Participants</span>

I really only have one, and it's this.  **Give a great talk.  **I know
not everyone likes giving talks, but either someone thought you'd do a
good job and that you have interesting work (invited sessions) or you
thought your work was worth sharing (contributed sessions), so in either
case, you kind of owe it to the attendees to at least *try* to engage
them in your research.  The ability to clearly communicate your research
is an integral part of being a good scientist, I think, so it's part of
the job, and conferences are a good way to practice this.  ENAR actually
puts out a [list of guidelines for giving an effective presentation][]!
 The most engaging talks I've seen have these qualities:

-   <span style="line-height:13px;">They stay in the time limit
    *comfortably,*so the presenter isn't completely rushed.
     The 1-slide-per-minute guideline seems to work surprisingly well
    for me.  (This means that if I see that "1/40" footer on Beamer
    slides at the beginning of your 15-minute talk, I will inwardly shed
    a tiny tear)</span>
-   They explain the big picture well, but might leave out some details.
     I think this is awesome because then if people are intrigued by the
    general idea, they'll ask the speaker afterward about the details.
     If people are confused about the concept, they kind of just forget
    about it and move on to listening to the next talk.  Leaving out
    details is a great way to stay within the time limit.
-   They practice their talk at least once.  Maybe they even invite
    someone to listen - someone who knows stuff, but doesn't know about
    their research.  Then they'll be able to tell whether their talk is
    appropriately timed, or whether they've left out too many details.
    (This actually just what I try to do - but I like to imagine that
    I'm not a crazy person and that my favorite speakers also practice
    their talks.)
-   They use slides to *remind*them what to talk about rather than
    to *tell *them.  Which means they don't *read slides full of text as
    they point at the words they are reading with a laser pointer*.  The
    "reminder slides" are usually diagrams or pictures.
-   They tell a joke or two (Yihui mentioned this in his post and
    actually told jokes at his talk, which I really appreciated.  My
    favorite quote of his was something along the lines of "I included
    some funny stuff in here.  I'm sorry if it offends you.  You may
    think this is not ENAR."  Ha!  But the larger point is that *having
    a joke in your presentation absolutely should not make it
    un-ENAR-like!  *That's just sad!  Statistics is fun!  We should be
    able to laugh about it!)

I'd be super pumped to go to a stat conference in a cool city with a
sweet app, a happy hour poster session, and some really awesome talks -
keeping my fingers crossed!

 

  [ENAR]: http://enar.org/meetings.cfm
  [Yihui's post on conferences]: http://yihui.name/en/2013/03/on-enar-or-statistical-meetings-in-general/
  [JSM 2012]: http://www.amstat.org/meetings/jsm/2012/program.cfm
  [John]: http://biostat.jhsph.edu/~jmuschel/
  [Karl]: http://www.biostat.wisc.edu/~kbroman/
  [Tom]: http://www.biostat.jhsph.edu/~tlouis/
  [list of guidelines for giving an effective presentation]: http://enar.org/presentationguidelines.cfm
